It was an incredible claim, yet the evidence was incontrovertible to the observant. Precariously perched balancing boulders, deeply scarred and abraded bedrock surfaces, deposits of moraine gravel; all very like the artifacts seen with glaciers, save for evidencing some stupendously enormous scale. By the late nineteenth century it was generally accepted that entire northern continents had once been covered with kilometers thick ice sheets, and that in fact our Stone Age ancestors had lived through one such epoch. Indeed, by the end of the nineteenth century it was determined that this ice age or period of extreme climate change had happened more than once over recent geologic time. The ice had advanced and receded repeatedly.

Further discoveries soon indicated that this period of glaciation and climate oscillation was a relative anomaly that only occasionally punctuated much longer epochs of a stable and consistently warmer climate, periods that had left fossil evidence of tropical plants in now frigid areas.

And yet causality was ever the crux. What could serve to explain these profound changes from a balmy warm to a glacial epoch, and then further the cycling of ice ages within a glacial epoch? No acceptable explanation was immediately obvious.

Over the hundred years stretching between the mid nineteenth to the mid twentieth centuries a number of explanations were posited. For example Croll and later Milankovitch suggested that the periodic climate changes were attributable to subtle variations in Earth's orbit and inclination with resultant changes in sunlight on the northern hemisphere. It was a grand idea and improvements in our ability to determine the dates of these changes lent further credence to the astronomical theory. By the 1970's most scientists accepted that the Milankovitch cycles coincided precisely with the climate changes they saw evidenced before them. More difficult to understand was how these minor changes in sunlight and orbit could manifest such profound changes in climate.

Based upon these cycles and their repetitions it was assumed that we were then on the cusp of a cooling spell. A new ice age was expected to be in advent over the next thousand years. Then by 1985 ice cores extracted by a French-Soviet team at Vostok Station in Antarctica contained an entire glacial epoch together with samples from before and after. Analysis of the entrapped gas content showed that the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide coincided with the temperature variations.